Enhance theme docs (#7406)
plone/volto: docs/source/development/add-ons/theme.md

# Create a Volto theme add-on

Volto supports two practical ways to theme a site:

- Use your project’s default add-on as the theme (single add-on)
- Create a separate, reusable theme add-on (multi-project reuse)

Both approaches use the same mechanics under the hood. Pick the one that fits your needs, then follow the matching setup below.

The file {file}`volto.config.js` provides the ability to programmatically declare add-ons and the active theme.
See {ref}`volto-config-js` for more information.
For convenience, it can also be set via a `THEME` environment variable.

## Select the active theme

> You can declare the active theme in one of three ways (first two are preferred):

Author: Okay they are only two.

> You can declare the active theme in one of three ways (first two are preferred):

Author: Fixed.

# Create a Volto theme add-on

Volto supports two practical ways to theme a site:

-   Use your project's default add-on as the theme.
    This option is practical when you want to have a single combined add-on for the exclusive use of your project and not reuse it for other projects.

> -   Create a separate, reusable theme add-on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   {ref}`create-a-reusable-theme-add-on-label`.
```

    This option is practical when you want to reuse your theme add-on for multiple projects.

Both approaches use the same mechanics under the hood.
Pick the one that fits your needs, then follow the matching setup below.

The file {file}`volto.config.js` provides the ability to programmatically declare add-ons and the active theme.
See {ref}`volto-config-js` for more information.
For convenience, it can also be set via a `THEME` environment variable.

## Use your default add-on as the theme

This approach is simplest for a single project: keep configuration, customizations, and theme together.

1. Ensure your default add-on is listed in `addons` (in {file}`volto.config.js` or {file}`package.json`).

1. Set `theme` to your default add-on’s package name (see examples above).

> 1. In your default add-on, create {file}`src/theme/theme.config` and set up the theme (example below). Place any overrides under {file}`src/theme`.

Author: Not true.

Reviewer: Doing over. This one suggestion should have been applied to the entire list.

> 1. In your default add-on, create {file}`src/theme/theme.config` and set up the theme (example below). Place any overrides under {file}`src/theme`.

Reviewer: wtf? GitHub mucked up my suggestion. Fixing.

> 1. Ensure your default add-on is listed in `addons` (in {file}`volto.config.js` or {file}`package.json`).
> 
> 1. Set `theme` to your default add-on’s package name (see examples above).
> 
> 1. In your default add-on, create {file}`src/theme/theme.config` and set up the theme (example below). Place any overrides under {file}`src/theme`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1.  Ensure your default add-on is listed in `addons`, either in {file}`volto.config.js` or {file}`package.json`.
1.  Set `theme` to your default add-on's package name, as described in {ref}`select-the-active-theme-label`.
1.  In your default add-on, create a file {file}`src/theme/theme.config`, and set up the theme, as shown in the example in {ref}`select-the-active-theme-label`.
    Place any overrides under {file}`src/theme`.
```

Author: I did it in a commit.

Reviewer: This one still needs review.

# Create a Volto theme add-on

Volto supports two practical ways to theme a site:

-   {ref}`use-your-projects-default-add-on-as-the-theme-label`.
    This option is practical when you want to have a single combined add-on for the exclusive use of your project and not reuse it for other projects.
-   {ref}`create-a-reusable-theme-add-on-label`.
    This option is practical when you want to reuse your theme add-on for multiple projects.

Both approaches use the same mechanics under the hood.
Pick the option that better fits your needs, then follow its corresponding documentation below.

The file {file}`volto.config.js` provides the ability to programmatically declare add-ons and the active theme.
See {ref}`volto-config-js` for more information.
For convenience, it can also be set via a `THEME` environment variable.

(use-your-projects-default-add-on-as-the-theme-label)=

> ## Use your project's default add-on as the theme

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Use your project's default add-on as the theme
```

import '../../theme/main.scss';
```

You may want to do this to create a completely new theming experience adapted to your way of doing things that do not match the current Volto theming experience.
For example, if you want to use another preprocessor in the theme, such as SCSS.
Or perhaps your client requires the base consist entirely of pre-made components based on another library beside Semantic UI.
See {ref}`volto-custom-theming-strategy` for an example of a custom theme escape hatch.

While building your own escape hatch for theming, you can use the preprocessor of your choice, while maintaining the "base" Volto theme, but customizing it using the resultant CSS.
If you prefer a CSS-variables-first approach for block styling, see the {ref}`block-style-wrapper-label` guide and use custom CSS properties to theme blocks consistently.

You can see an example of such a theme in [Volto Light Theme](https://github.com/kitconcept/volto-light-theme).

```{important}
Volto relies on Semantic UI for styling the {term}`Public UI` core components and the {term}`CMSUI`.
You can use your own theming escape hatch to customize the base theme, but you cannot completely discard Semantic UI.
```

> ## Advanced: Add support for your theme allow being extended by other add-ons

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Advanced: extend your theme in other add-ons
```

It will also automatically add an `addonsThemeCustomizationsMain` alias that you can reference from the theme as shown above.

```{note}

> These SCSS-based extension entry points work only when a theme is declared (in {file}`volto.config.js` or {file}`package.json`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These SCSS-based extension entry points work only when a theme is declared in either {file}`volto.config.js` or {file}`package.json`.
```
